---
date: "2011-01-18T00:00:00Z"
published: true
title: 'Why write?'
---

It is a question that you will face, should you deign to start a blog (or column, journal, etc.).

> EUTHYPHRO: Why do you have a blog?
>
> YOU: Because it exercises my urchin mind and I want to share my meager kibbles with SearchEngineGod.

**Weak answer.** Too cliché. We must find a better answer.

_10 weeks later..._

> YOU: Friend, ask me "Why do you have a blog?" again!
>
> EUTHYPHRO: You still have a blog?
>
> YOU: —Yes. I implore you, repeat your question of ten weeks heretofore.
>
> EUTHYPHRO: Why do you have a blog?
>
> YOU: I wrote a blog post to answer that thoroughly.
>
> EUTHYPHRO: *\[flees]*


**Why write ~~a blog~~:**

- <b>If it isn't indexed, it doesn't exist.</b> Content that is difficult to find will reach very few people.
- <b>Publishing has never been easier.</b> The printing press afforded the unordained voice an audience beyond the town square, disturbing the Church<sup>1</sup>, and later the Crown<sup>2</sup>, as digital media disturb the Press now.
- <b>Documentation matters.</b> 
    - Fred Brooks elucidates: "Only when one writes do the gaps appear and the inconsistencies protrude. The act of writing turns out to require hundreds of mini-decisions, and it is the existence of these that distinguishes clear, exact policies from fuzzy ones."
- Writing is a **mnemonic (and error-correction) device:** writing = grokking.
    - <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20080903204101/http://www.technologyreview.com/blog/boyden/21925/">Ed Boyden</a> pontificates: "Synthesize new ideas constantly. Never read passively. Annotate, model, think, and synthesize while you read... Document everything obsessively. ... Much of creativity is learning how to see things properly..."
- Publishing—even informally—forces you to finish thoughts/tasks/experiments/projects, whereby to put them in a form that is presentable to an audience.
- Writing answers questions that even <i>you</i> may struggle to answer, such as: 
    - What have you been up to? 
    - What did you do last year? 
    - What's new in your fabulous life?
- <b>Production.</b> You have studied, and pondered, and mastered difficult concepts--but what have you produced? What is the result of these ministrations, beyond erudite ether? Are you boiling your experiences and annealing your thoughts into a tangible form?


---

1. Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. <i>The printing press as an agent of change: communications and cultural transformations in early-modern Europe, Volumes 1-2. </i>Cambridge University Press, 1994. <a href="http://books.google.com/books?id=5LR1SrkIrocC&amp;lpg=PP1&amp;ots=tBKT75VJaN&amp;dq=protestantism%20%20bible%20printing%20press&amp;pg=PA330#v=onepage&amp;q=protestantism%20%20bible%20printing%20press&amp;f=false">330-331</a>. "Partly because religious dissent was implemented by print, it could leave a much more indelible and far-reaching impression than dissent had ever left before."
2. Emerson, Everett H. <i>American literature, 1764-1789: the Revolutionary years.</i> Univ of Wisconsin Press, 1977. <a href="http://books.google.com/books?id=DDvjVgAkqnAC&amp;lpg=PA19&amp;dq=thomas%20paine%20anonymous%20%2Bpamphlets&amp;pg=PA19#v=onepage&amp;q=thomas%20paine%20anonymous%20+pamphlets&amp;f=false">19</a>. "pamphlets were a major literary weapon."
