---
author: Justin M. Keyes
date: "2023-12-03T00:00:00Z"
published: true
title: Where is my mind (2023)
slug: my-mind
---

Snapshot of the (technical) problems I'm thinking about right now:

- AWS:
    - Logging is a special case of telemetry (or vice-versa). Unify telemetry logging client. Incremental step: logging system is a "sink" for the telemetry, and the source of truth for _querying_ metrics logs.
        - Reimplement the metrics "collector" to be browser-compatible. Currently it uses nodejs `async_hooks`.
        - Need to get this done before another 6+ months of technical debt accrues.
        - 1 week of work.
    - Redevelop the API for capturing a telemetry "span" (user workflow).
        - 1 week of work.
    - WASM-based code sharing solution.
        - 1 month of work.
    - Strategy for scaling development across 20+ teams (100+ developers). Monorepo, libraries, horizontal, LSP: all of the above.
        - 2 weeks of work.
    - Trying to design and develop software while working a Wendy's drive-thru.
        - Every day.
- Neovim:
    - Finish talk for Neovimconf 2023. Understand what happened in the last 12 months, be able to explain and the most interesting contributions.
        - Deadline in 5 days.
        - 3+ days of work.
    - Finish `vim.uri`.
        - 1-2 days of work.
    - Finish `[optional]` support in vimdoc parser.
        - 4 hours of focus time.
    - Finish `pkg.json` (packspec) specification.
        - Started 4 months ago, idling for 3 months = risk of decay / lost investment (mis-timing, lost momentum, misalignment with key parties).
        - 1 week of work.
    - Implement function name linter. Too much time spent validating function names.
        - 1 day of work.
    - Rename various APIs before 0.10 release (imminent).
        - 2-3 days of work.
    - Need to do a pynvim release.
        - 2 hours of yak shaving.
    - Need to do a node-client release.
        - 2-4 hours of yak shaving.
    - node-client code needs a linting overhaul.
        - 2+ days of work.
    - node-client `getNvimFromEnv()` needs to work without `$PATH`.
        - 1 day of work.
    - Rework Nvim `--remote` interface.
        - 2 weeks of work.
- Plugins:
    - Make a fugitive-like minimalist wrapper for `gh`.
        - Prototype = 1 day of work, Beta = 1 week of work.
