---
title: "Task management"
layout: post
date: 2023-02-01
description: "Trim trees instead of grooming backlogs"
published: true
author: Justin M. Keyes
---

# Problem

Task management is how you decide what to work on—in life, business, project
development. For many this is like diet fads: try lots of hopeless
methodologies, give up, repeat.

But it is a solved problem. You just need to frame it in a tractable way. "I
need to rank EVERYTHING" is not a tractable framing if new tasks arrive every
week (day? minute?). Yet many task-tracking tools have features to "help" you
(globally!) rank items.

The naïve, generalized, _intractable_ model of task management is:

> Task management: an N-dimensional classification problem with unknown features
> and incompatible units.

# Solution

The solution is to remorselessly truncate the N-dimensional, unit-less problem
into a 1-dimensional, fixed-cost problem.

# Prioritizing a snapshot

Prioritizing _once_ is relatively easy. Commonly expressed as the (apocryphal)
"Warren Buffett method":

> Only the top three priorities matter, ignore everything else (until you finish
> one).

"Three" is adjustable, but more than ten is not useful: the main point is that
there is a fixed number of Most Important Things that everyone on your team
knows each morning are the Most Important Things.

# Prioritizing a stream

It is less obvious how to apply that method it to an ever-growing queue of work.
Prioritizing a snapshot in time is easy—but new information is arriving
continuously, uncomfortably, and this is where you give up, or pray to
[scrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)), or hire
a project manager to outsource the question and delay the truth. Evaluating your
backlog every week (or whatever your scrum master is dreaming of), is a waste of
time. Your backlog-grooming meetings are a waste of time _multiplied by_ the
number of people in the meeting.

The [Eisenhower Method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_management#The_Eisenhower_Method)
hints at how you can comfortably apply Warren Buffett to a stream, by using
a crude rubric: decide _urgency_ and _importance_ for each new item, so that it
falls into one of four buckets:

1. Important and Urgent? Do it.
2. Important but not Urgent? Schedule it.
3. Urgent but Unimportant? Delegate it.
4. Unimportant and Not Urgent? Drop it.

Almost nothing should land in bucket 1. Most new items go directly to bucket 2;
"schedule it" means "unceremoniously pitch it into the amorphous blackhole
called your _backlog_".

The crudeness of the rubric is critical: it must be cheap. Its distraction cost
per item, must be near zero. New items flow on-demand through this triage function.

# Consultation

The idea is to maintain [fire and motion](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2002/01/06/fire-and-motion/)
at low cost, on-demand (no meetings).

The intake queue for your project, business, life is an infinite stream. You can
fight the stream at _high cost_ with scrum, "planning poker" meetings, elaborate Jira
features, hiring more PMs, and various other _coping methods_ for buying
randomization disguised as optimism—then wait some months for the mediocre
results and kinda ignore the lack of ROI on your investment...

...or you can accept that randomization is inevitable, embrace it, and use that
power to comfortably just drop things. If your current capacity
is full, drop whatever exceeds it. This is how any healthy system works, it's
called [backpressure](https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/glossary#Back-Pressure).

This planning and intake-handling scales because each team (~10 people) does the
same process. You only have cognitive capacity to reason about the topics in
your personal scope (your team, project, etc.). You can peek at the "top three"
priorities of another team, but it's not something you think about day to day.

# Implementation

For a team project, your goals are:

- Utilization:
    - Discover work by writing down tasks.
    - Schedule high-priority/high-leverage work.
- Visibility: people can see progress on projects and epics.
    - Roadmap
    - Communicate with stakeholders (%done, green/yellow/red)
    - What we did we do? What was delayed?
- Forecasting: predict what we will do.
- Availability: no un-triaged items.

## Funnel

To organize a team of human AIs, you need to be able to draw from a pool of
triaged tasks. This is solved with a very simple mechanisms: shallow trees.

The general model of your triage "funnel" is:

    Funnel = streams + projects

"Sprints" are your team's "unit of work", typically a two week block of time
used as a planning target. The sprint is a _stream_ that absorbs new items.

"Projects" (also "Epics" at a higher hierarchical layer) are shallow trees that
group items. With this simple structure, whenever you have capacity to move to
the next project, you just draw from the top N subtasks of that project. (The
top N subtasks are again prioritized in the same "Top N" manner, where we don't
care about anything not in the Top N.)

By applying Warren Buffett on-demand, you funnel work into (1) the current _sprint_,
(2) anything tracked as a _project_, (3) _labelled_ items in your backlog.

Just as you know your current "top three" topics for the next week or month, you
also have a rough idea of the "top ten" topics for the next year(s). Each topic
is one of the following:

- project: a shallow tree of subtasks under a finite, deliverable topic, or
- epic: a shallow tree of ideas or projects under a (potentially never-ending) topic.
- label: any arbitrary topic attached to any item.

## Triage

A task is _triaged_ if it has a topic. That means it was either _labeled_ and
snoozed to the backlog (unstructured), or it was added to a project as a subtask
(structured). Whenever an idea or request arrives, anyone can "triage" that
item, which means do one of the following:

- add it as a subtask to one of the "top ten" projects, or
- put it in the backlog (add labels or tags too, if you like)

This is how you translate an infinite stream into structures, at fixed cost. New
items attach to known topics. Everything else goes into the backlog—with topic
labels, so you can reach them in the future when you decide that topic is now
one of your top three priorities.

To plan and forecast (because your manager or director wants this), you need to
estimate the subtasks of a project. The main thing to remember here is that
a task can be small, medium, or big. That means it takes days, weeks, or months.
It's a waste of time to try to estimate with more granularity than that.

## Project

Projects have structure: ordering, dependencies.

Just as the global scope of your "top three priorities" ignores the rest of the
infinite stream, when you are looking at the flat list of subtasks in a project,
you also only care about the top ten items there. You are not re-evaluating all
of the potential tasks every time you consider the project. Only the top ten
tasks matter. If something comes to your attention and it's more important than
one of those top ten items, then put it near the top of the items. The other
items shift lower.

The priority of an item is decided by its _leverage_. If an item _blocked_ by an
external factor, that also shifts it down (because the cost increases, which
decreases leverage).

    leverage = (impact / cost)

When your team needs more work, or you're planning the next two weeks, you know
the top three highest-priority projects. Pick one. Then assign items from the top
ten subtasks in that project to your team. Repeat.

## Sizing

Many people try nonsense like [t-shirt sizing](https://asana.com/resources/t-shirt-sizing)
or Fibonacci sizing. Such logarithmic units are incompatible, so you can't
easily calculate a meaningful total, which means you can't compare groups of
tasks by estimated cost. They can't be mentioned in an email without extra
explanation. Etc.

The size a task, think about its cost in terms of days of work. A small task
takes _one day_. It doesn't matter if it actually takes only minutes or hours
because the variance washes out over a large pool of tasks. Medium tasks take,
say, three days. Large tasks take eleven days. Anything bigger than that is
a project, so it should have subtasks and you should size _those_. But if you
don't know the subtasks yet, just size it at one-hundred eleven days.

- small = 1 day
- medium = 3 days
- big = 11 days
- project = 111 days

## Scalability

If one person can’t manage your backlog, then your team has too much scope.
There are two ways to deal with that:

1. Let the excess items go un-triaged (and focus on your top three priorities).
2. Create another team to subdivide the intake queue. Now you have two teams,
   each with their own "top three" priorities.

# Business card

- Task tracker = social media for collaborating on projects (passive coordination).
  Passive (habits) >> Active (meetings).
- Sprint = planning unit-of-work. Whatever you are working on for the next two weeks.
- Planning meeting = edit the upcoming sprint.
- Project = a task with subtasks, a (shallow) tree.
- Epic = an ongoing topic, a task with projects, a (less shallow) tree.
- Backlog = "out of scope until we finish the current top three priorities".

# Project management

Task management is a subset of project management. Project management covers
unsolved problems like cross-team coordination. I don't have a simple answer for
that, but open source development suggests that "passive" mechanisms are where
to look. "Bug bounties" and advocacy are _active_. These things don't scale. See
also [Meetings are the work](https://medium.com/@ElizAyer/meetings-are-the-work-9e429dde6aa3).


<!--
vim: tw=80
-->
